once around Atlas.
So, this is another discovery by Trillo
and Brown at the Paloma Observatory. And
we've just got this rather faint image
of it up at the right here. And the
telescope
Paloma located in the constellation of
Scorpio again and designated 2003 AZ 84
by year of discovery and catalog number.
Now the name Atlas, that's the goddess
of sorrow and grief from the epic poem
Shield of Heracles. And it gets a
mention in the Iliad. Homer's Iliad
refers to Atlas as the mist that covers
the eyes of the dying.
It's located in the outer solar system
beyond Neptune in the Kiper belt. You
can see the orbit marked there with a
yellow colored trajectory. going around
along with many of those other objects
in a 247 year long orbit ranging from 32
to 47 astronomical units and tipped at
13 12° to the planets. So fairly similar
to many of these others and it is a
Plutino in a 3:2 orbital relationship
with Neptune. So Neptune does three laps
of the solar system for every two that a
Plutino does.
Physically slightly elongated.
940 km along the long axis by 766x 490.
It's the best estimate. And that puts it
actually as the third largest of these
Plutinos overall. And it's probably
enough that it should be classed as a
dwarf planet. seem to be a tremendous
number of these. Now,
mass-wise though, it still only adds up
to a 60th of the mass of Pluto.
And the density is quite low. Density of
Pluto is 1.9 g per cubic cm. This is
half that at 0.87,
less than that of water. And so the
explanation is that these smaller kiper
belt objects don't have the gravity to
completely eliminate any voids. So as
material accumulates often you get gaps
left as the material piles up. So
they're more of a rubble pile. Although
they're made of mostly ices of course,
but at these temperatures those ices
will be frozen up hard as steel.
And it's spinning rapidly. 6.7 hour
rotation, possibly though double that
13.4. And there is some doubt based on
the light curve as the apparent
brightness goes up and down over time.
You can either choose to see a period of
6.7 hours or possibly that it's rotating
along its long axis and from our point
of view giving a double peak. So that
the period might truly be 13.4.
Now, as shown on the image there, the
artist's representation of Atlas, we've
got a possibility of a small moon. This
is the discovery image taken by Hubble
of Atlas and its moon, which has not
been given a name yet. We're not even
sure that it's there because nobody's
been able to find it again. It's not
been recovered, as they say. um
estimated to be in a 12-day orbit and
around about a 70 kilometer sized object
based purely on this one photograph and
its brightness. So, it'll be very very
interesting to try and track this down
and see with an moon in orbit. Of
course, if we were truly able to
estimate the distance from the center
and the period, we could work out the
mass and be more certain about things.
The spectrum reveals very little in the
visible a flat featureless spectrum. So
no absorption bands and that's uh
down in the infrared we are revealing
the usual traces of water ice ammonium
hydrate and possibly methane as well. So
similar in spectra to things like Orcus
and Ixian and other Kiper belt objects
and perhaps
less of the red color um and slightly
darker than many. So they do all vary a
little bit and it seems there are two
classes. Those that are um in the
Plutino type orbits and those that are
not. Um but maybe it's early days and we
shouldn't draw too much inference from
the limited statistics that we have
about these fascinating objects in the
outer solar system. So thanks very much
for listening and do enjoy my other
tours of some of the other quer belt
objects and I'll leave it there for now.
Thanks again.